h2. Découvrir Sproutcore : partie 1

Bienvenue dans Sproutcore! Ce guide a pour objectif de vous opérationnel pour utiliser le framework Sproutcore. 

Dans cette première partie nous allons aborder :

* L'installation de Sproutcore sur votre machine.
* L'utilisation des outils Sproutcore permettant de générer le squelette de votre première application.
* Lancer le serveur de développement Sproutcore pour tester votre application
* Modifier votre application et constater les changements en temps réel sur le serveur de développement.

endprologue.

h3. Introduction

The introductory "Getting Started" guides pages are step-by-step treatments of concepts needed to make a full 
SproutCore application. 

This first "Getting Started" guide will ensure that you have the latest version of Sproutcore installed and 
configured properly. If you run into any issues or bumps along the way, please reach out on the
"mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/sproutcore or find us on IRC at #sproutcore!

Ce guide de découverte va pas à pas vous faire découvrir les concepts nécessaire à la création d'une application Sproutcore complète.

Cette première partie va vous permettre d'installer et de configurer la dernière version de Sproutcore. Si vous rencontrer un problème dans ce processus, vous pouvez rejoindre la groupe de discussion (
"Google Groups":http://groups.google.com/group/sproutcore), ou aller sur IRC #Sproutcore.

h3. Installation

Il existe 2 façons d'installer sproutcore.

* Via l'installeur
* Via RubyGems

La méthode d'installation que vous aller choisir sera essentiellement basé sur le système vous aller travailler avec Sproutcore et votre niveau d'expérience en Ruby
L'installeur est pour le moment disponible seulement pour Windows et mac. Si vous êtes sur Linux ou une autre plateforme vous devrez utiliser la méthode RubyGems.

PS : Si votre machine possède déjà l'environnement de développement Ruby il vous sera plus intéressant d'utiliser ma méthode RubyGems, de plus cette méthode vous garantira d'avoir la dernière version de Sproutcore. Pour installer Sproutcore via RubyGems il faut taper :

<shell>
gem update sproutcore
</shell>

Avant de continuer, nous vous invitons à visiter la "Page d'installation":http://sproutcore.com/install/ et de télécharger l'installeur approprié , ou de suivre le guide dédier à votre plate-forme.

Parfait, maintenant que Sproutcore est installé, nous allons pouvoir avancé et créer notre première application.

h3. Créer une nouvelle application Sproutcore

Quand vous commencer l'apprentissage d'un nouveau langage ou d'un framework, il peut-être interressant de créer un dossier séparer ou stocker l'ensemble du code lié.  Vous pouvez donc créer un nouveau dossier dédier à sproutcore dans la zone ou vous ranger habituellement vos développement. Par exemple : 

<shell>
$ mkdir -p ~/development/sproutcore
</shell>

Note : le Signe ($) présent en début de ligne de doit pas être entrer votre console. Il permet de distinguer les lignes étant des commandes des résultats de ces mêmes commandes.

Ce répertoire va maintenant pouvoir servir d'emplacement à l'ensemble de vos travaux sur Sproutcore. Nous allons pouvoir créer un nouveau projet Sproutcore:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore
$ sproutcore gen project getting_started

   ~ Created directory at getting_started
   ~ Created file at getting_started/Buildfile
   ~ Created file at getting_started/README

   Your project is now ready to use!

$ cd getting_started
</shell>

Maintenant nous avons un dossier dédié au projet "Getting_started", Nous pourrons créer plusieurs application au sein de ce projet, mais pour le moment nous nous contenterons de créer une application basique "Hello World", ceci afin de vérifier que tout fonctionne correctement.

Create the app in the getting_started project directory:

<shell>
$ sproutcore gen app TodosOne
   ~ Created directory at apps
   ~ Created directory at apps/todos_one
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/Buildfile
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/core.js
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/main.js
   ~ Created directory at apps/todos_one/resources
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/resources/_theme.css
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/resources/loading.rhtml
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/resources/main_page.js
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/theme.js

  Your application target is now ready to use!
</shell>

Your directory structure should now look like the following:

* *getting_started/*
** *Buildfile*
** *README.md*
** *apps/*
*** *todos_one/*
**** *Buildfile*
**** *core.js*
**** *main.js*
**** *theme.js*
**** *resources/*
***** *_theme.css*
***** *loading.rhtml*
***** *main_page.js*

h3. Explanation

When you are building a web application in SproutCore, it is common to have
a multitude of mini-applications in order to separate out the logic into
manageable parts. For instance, Apple's iCloud application has apps for
e-mail, contacts and finding your friends.

This is why there is an *apps/* directory inside of the getting_started project directory. It
allows you to easily separate distinct applications.

Inside the *apps/todos_one* directory, you will find the Buildfile for the TodosOne application.
Just like the project (getting_started) has a *Buildfile*, each application or
framework that you create should also have a *Buildfile* which specifies it's
requirements as well as any build-options that you may want to change, such as
whether or not to minify and compact the code.

The *core.js* file is the first file that gets loaded, and is where the actual
application is defined. This is also where you usually define any global
constants that the application might use (which should be very few), or any
configuration that external libraries might require.

The *main.js* file is usually very basic. It starts the application. If you
are using the Statechart framework (which we will discuss in Part 2), *main.js*
would simply initialize the statechart. If you open up *main.js* right now,
you'll see that it appends the main view to the screen.

The resources folder contains things like images, stylesheets and views.

Inside the resources folder, the *_theme.css* file defines that directory's
CSS theme. This allows you to define different themes for each directory.

The *resources/loading.rhtml* file defines the HTML that your users see before
SproutCore has fully loaded and handed control over to the application. For
now, it displays a simple loading message.

Lastly, the *resources/main_page.js* file describes the actual user interface of the
application. Open this file now and take a look. Depending upon how complex
the app becomes, you may decide to have just the mainPage and mainPane, or
you may decide you want to break it out a bit more by having a loadingPane,
loggedInPane, loggedOutPane, etc. Most applications have at least a few
panes, and possibly a few pages.

h3. Viewing Your Application

So, we have our SproutCore TodosOne application built, and we understand the basic
layout of the files. Let's see what it looks like in the browser!

Inside the project directory type the following command:

<shell>
$ sproutcore server
</shell>

NOTE: If you are attempting to run multiple copies of *sproutcore server* at the same
time, you will probably see an error about the port already being in use. If
so, just re-run the command and add --port 4030 so the second instance will not use 
the default 4020 port.

Using your favorite web browser, visit
"http://localhost:4020/todos_one":http://localhost:4020/todos_one. If all goes
well, you should see "Welcome to Sproutcore!" in the middle of the screen.

h3. Making Changes

Open up resources/main_page.js and change the "Welcome to SproutCore!"
line to say "SproutCore is Awesome!". Save the file and refresh the page in
your web browser. If the message updates properly, you're ready to move on to
"Getting Started: Part Two":/getting_started_2.html of the tutorial.

h3. Troubleshooting

As with any unfamiliar framework, you may hit a few snags on the way. Below
we list some of the common pitfalls that users have discovered, with
solutions for getting past them.

* <em>"Error: Handlebars is not defined Source File: ..."</em> - If you have previously
installed SproutCore 1.6 using the installer, you may see this error. If so, please make
sure to un-install SproutCore 1.6 first and then re-install 1.8.

* <em>"RuntimeError at /todos_one html_builder could not find a layout file for ..."</em> -
This error usually means that *sproutcore server* could not find SproutCore where it
thought it should exist. Make sure that you've properly installed the latest
version of SproutCore; and if you are using RubyGems, try closing and
re-opening the terminal to ensure that paths are properly set.

* <em>"Browser says 'No matching target'"</em> - This is generally caused if you
misspelled the name of the application in the URL. Make sure that you properly
typed it, and that you used underscores instead of spaces. For example:
'http://localhost/todos_one'.

* <em>"ERROR: missing } after property list ..."</em> - This error is usually thrown
if you added a property somewhere, but forgot to put a comma at the end.
Look at the line in the error, and then look above it to see if there is
a comma missing.

h3. Changelog

* March 1, 2011: initial version by "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale and "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* March 2, 2011: fixed formmating and added paths to filenames by "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio and "Peter Wagenet":credits.html#pwagenet
* March 22, 2011: cleaned up demo based on new features by "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* April 11, 2011: consistently use view classes and extend, update to reflect better Handlebars integration by "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats and "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale
* May 6, 2011: clarifications, minor inconsistency fixes, updated CSS for older browsers, plus new mobile section by "Tyler Keating":credits.html#publickeating
* May 9, 2011: update for recent changes in SproutCore 1.6 by "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale and "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* March 6, 2012: rewrite for SproutCore 1.8 by the 1.8 release sprint team, including the following who did much work on this task: "Tim Evans":credits.html#tce, "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio, "Jeff Pittman":credits.html#geojeff
* March 12, 2012: added new error and fixed italics in the troubleshooting section by "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio

